## Abstract

The Modern agriculture requires essential tools like Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) to run applications such as smart irrigation. These WSN help in monitoring the environment factors like soil moisture, temperature and humidity in order to manage and facilitate precise water usage constantly. Nevertheless, the nature of (WSNs) makes them an easy target of cyber threats, comprising denial-of-service (DoS), data modification, and unauthorized access of data. Confidentiality, integrity and Data availability (CIA) are the key to protect sensitive agriculture data and to maintain accurate operations.
  
This study introduces reliable security framework customized for WSNs in smart irrigation systems, utilizing the CIA triad fundamentals. The framework integrates advanced cryptographic techniques, including asymmetric cryptography for mutual authentication, AES encryption for data confidentiality, and digital signatures for data integrity. The main breakthrough is utilization of the Real-Or-Random (ROR) model to evaluate the system security in both phases initialization and operation. The ROR model guarantees the key cryptographic outputs, like shared session keys and encrypted messages are being indistinguishable random data, so validating the protocol’s immunity to attacks for examples: Distributed Denial -of-Service (DDoS), man-in-the-middle (MitM), and replay forward and backend attacks.
This research focused on enhanced and implementing a secure communication model for Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) in smart irrigation systems. The framework start making a comprehensive evaluation of the security challenges particular to smart irrigation systems, then followed by the design of the system architecture that incorporate lightweight encryption and authentication protocols tailored for low-power sensor nodes. The appropriate proposed framework was demonstrated through the smart irrigation case study.  The sensor data like temperature (R1), humidity (R2), weather prediction (R3), growth and monitoring report (R4), soil type (R5) is securely transmitted to controller station (Entity A) platform for the sake of analyzation and decision-making over a timestamp. This secure communication ensures the confidentiality and integrity of data, addressing key vulnerabilities in WSN deployments.
The system reached notable results in enhancing crop yield, minimizing water waste and cutting operational costs by allowing automated, data-driven irrigation. Also, it demonstrated a powerful resilience against cyber threats. Performance evaluations showed that the framework introduced minimal communication overhead (118 bytes per message) and fast computation times (4.2 milliseconds per cycle), ensuring the suitability for resource-constrained environments like smart irrigation.

Regardless of the strength points in the system, still the system has some limitations for example privacy – related issues. Future research should focus on improving saving energy consumption and using machine learning techniques to enhance decision making. Also to Integrate WSNs with Internet of Things (IoT) to serve intelligent data processing. 
